Selections from the journal of King Dobromir I Trpimirovic of Croatia.

*December 7, Anno Domini 1111*

I am [King Dobromir Trpimirovic][1], the first of my name. I have been exhorted
by my late father's court physician, [Ratimir][2], to keep this diary as a
record of my reign. [My late father][3], _requiescat in pace_, though he was a
polyglot and had traveled far, even to the frozen north to trade with and
convert the pagans there, and to the Holy City of David, as part of the pope's
ongoing great Crusade, was never a man of letters. It will be to the scribes
and scholars to chronicle his reign, and he will have no voice of his own in
history. His private doubts and pieties will be known only to his maker.

I do find myself wondering whether there will be very much more history in this
world to look back on him, or me, though. The Holy Land may soon once again be
in Christian hands, and surely the end times cannot but be hard on the heels of
such a propitious event. But until such times, I am here as God's humble
servant, and will record what I see, say, and do, that I may keep to the path
of righteousness.

[1]: 01_dobromir_images/20160827112516_1.jpg
[2]: 01_dobromir_images/20160827112526_1.jpg
[3]: 01_dobromir_images/20160827112537_1.jpg

*January 13, Anno Domini 1112*

Perhaps I was more correct than I realized when I said that the end times are
upon us. The German pretender to the Roman throne has compounded his errors,
and set up [a pretender to the throne of St. Peter][4]. This flimsy tapestry of
a world is fraying.

[4]: 01_dobromir_images/20160827112826_1.jpg

*February 26, Anno Domini 1112*

Mihajlo has suggested that I follow in the footsteps of my father, and launch a
mercantile expedition. I laughed at him and said that he had better serve that
hated man, the Doge Ordelaffo in Venice. We are kings, not merchants. But he
pressed his case, and [I conceded][5]. Glory is of little use without coin to
enable it. I did add one condition, that we should bring some priests, to
spread the word of God.

[5]: 01_dobromir_images/20160827112928_1.jpg

*March 12, A.D. 1112*

We set sail today. I pray to St. Nicholas and St. Domnius for my safe passage
and safe return. We are due to sail through the Bosphorus and into the Black
Sea, thence through the Caucasus to Persia.

*May 17, A.D. 1112*

Our stay at the court of Satrap Feridun has been terrible. First, he insists
that we are not in Persia, but rather in Caucasian Albania. Second, he will not
budge on issues of trade nor issues of doctrine. I fear this entire journey was
[a waste of time and money][6].

[6]: 01_dobromir_images/20160827113308_1.jpg

*March 16, A.D. 1114*

I have let this journal languish. The past years have been full of the
quotidian trivialities of rule. I have let myself be distracted by the
temporal, and neglected the spiritual. I have been distressed at the electoral
decisions of my dukes, nominating [a gouty catamite][7] as my successor, over
my own son. I have fawned over the birth of another son, who I have named Igor.

But now, [the papal schism is ended][8], with the German conceding to the
rightful pope in Rome, and I am reminded that this world is but a shadow. Would
that I had the ability to raise my armies and go forth and join the pope's call
for Crusade! But alas, to do so would be to leave my people at risk, and there
is no greater sin for a ruler than to abandon his people.

[7]: 01_dobromir_images/20160827113442_1.jpg
[8]: 01_dobromir_images/20160827113854_1.jpg

*April 25, A.D. 1114*

The Venetians have declared war. I ride with my armies tonight, to meet them on
the field and defend my kingdom. May it be God's will that I write in this
journal again.

*October 27, A.D. 1114*

I have harried the Venetians across the countryside, doing damage to my
people's fields and crops, but less than the Doge Ordelaffo would have done had
he his way. We have met in battle, and I have bested them time and time again.
The soldiers of the Great Company have been of great assistance, and my earlier
observation that glory requires money feels more true than ever.

But I received bad news today, among the missives from my generals. [The Pope
has abandoned the Crusade.][9] Perhaps the millennium is not immanent.

[9]: 01_dobromir_images/20160827114304_1.jpg

*May 11, A.D. 1115*

The war with the Venetians continues, and the Great Company is becoming very
difficult to keep happy. My coffers are being bled dry by these damned
Italians. I have been forced into the unhappy position of indebting myself to
[Jewish moneylenders][10].

[10]: 01_dobromir_images/20160827114609_1.jpg

*February 24, A.D. 1116*

This war stretches on. I have dismissed the mercenaries, and held the Venetians
at bay, but I cannot get the decisive victory I need. Or God will not grant it
to me. And I fear that is not the least of the afflictions He has placed on me.
My physician, the venerable Ratimir, has told me that the symptoms I have been
suffering under may well be signs of [the small pox][11]. He tells me that a course
of leeches can cure me, and I pray to God.

If I survive, I fear I may have to make white peace with the Venetians. I am
not fit to continue the fight, and as I suffer, so does my kingdom.

[11]: 01_dobromir_images/20160827115132_1.jpg

*August 7, A.D. 1117*

My symptoms have recurred. The land has healed, but I have not. And now Ratimir
thinks that it was never the small pox, but has been [a cancer][12] all along.

He has recommended a course of treatment that I find calming, if nothing else:
[we stay awake stargazing][13], to bring my body and soul back into sympathy
with the moon.

[12]: 01_dobromir_images/20160827115619_1.jpg
[13]: 01_dobromir_images/20160827115624_1.jpg

*October 14, A.D. 1117*

I have gotten worse again. My head aches, I cannot stop coughing. I pray to my
Savior every day, and Ratimir comes and goes from my chambers with a drawn and
worried look on his face. I have heard him say that he may have a cure for me,
but he seems troubled when he speaks of it. He consults with visiting scholars
and mystics, always just out of my earshot, always in hushed tones. He has
talked of a hope for "another way", but the way of all flesh is to die, and so
must I.

It is no use, of course. He has always been stubborn, and if I were to say that
I am content with my life and face my death with trust in God, he would merely
redouble his efforts to cure me.

*October 17, A.D. 1117*

I now know what the "other way" Ratimir sought was. He has cured me, but oh,
the old fool! At what a cost.

This morning, I felt well, and he sent a servant to invite me to his chambers.
Would that I had not gone! Would that he had not done this for me. There, no
sooner had I entered, than I witnessed what may be self-slaughter were it not
for so selfless a purpose. [He died that I may live.][14]

My symptoms are gone. My head is clear, my spirits strong. I now must go and
argue with the bishop that this was no suicide, and that Ratimir should be
buried in sacred ground.

[14]: 01_dobromir_images/20160827115752_1.jpg

*November 10, A.D. 1117*

With Ratimir resting in the churchyard, it has been my preoccupation to find
another physician, one that may approach his skill and loyalty. Every candidate
paraded in front of me has been a waste, a quacksalver and a charlatan.

[Until, that is, today.][15]

The most majestic horse I have ever seen came to my court today, with some
half-witted leech on his back. I instantly knew that _this_ was the physician I
sought. I saw something of Ratimir's long face in his, and despite the
protestations of my court, I have appointed him my personal physician. I shall
go riding with him tomorrow.

> _Historian's note: It is unclear whether King Dobrimir is talking about the man
or the horse in this passage. He describes the man in dismissive terms, but
then, it beggars belief to think that he could appoint a_ horse _as court
physician._

[15]: 01_dobromir_images/20160827120154_1.jpg

*August 20, A.D. 1118*

I lie in bed, injured at the hand of my own kin. My own _heir_, as the dukes
have finally rallied behind someone of house Trpimirovic, and I cannot (or
could not before this day!) object to someone of my blood wearing the crown
when I am gone.

Three days ago, Prince Kresimir had the audacity to walk into my hall and
challenge me to single combat. He made some speech, I suppose about how I had
wronged and insulted him, but I saw the Adversary there, standing behind him
and whispering in his ear. I saw the serpent coiled in his eye. I had to
accept. The courtiers kept us apart for days, trying to broker a peace, but
what peace is there to make with Satan!

Alas, would that my skill at arms had equalled my faith! [The duel did not go
well][16], but I have, at least, my life still. I fear that Kresimir, or the
devil, spared me so that he might take my soul in a state of impurity, but I
will keep vigilant and abjure the devil.

[16]: 01_dobromir_images/20160827120448_1.jpg

*March 15, A.D. 1120*

Ratimir's old cure lingers with me. I went up this night, to stargaze and feel
the pull of the moon, but my guards and courtiers keep talking in hushed tones
as though a little stargazing [embarrasses them][17].

[17]: 01_dobromir_images/20160827120749_1.jpg

*February 20, A.D. 1123*

I hear that a Frenchman of that noble house of Bourbon had been making it known
that he coveted my crown, to which he had not even a pretense of a claim. I
hear also that [God struck him down][18].

> _Historian's note: Dobrimir is referring to the death by poison of Érrard de
Bourbon. The journals of Robert de Bourbon are rather less circumspect, and
reveal that he poisoned Érrard, with the full knowledge and complicity of King
Dobrimir._

[18]: 01_dobromir_images/20160827121600_1.jpg

*March 15, A.D. 1125*

I will begin work on the castle gardens today. I think that a maze would please
me. I have been talking with a nobleman who tells me that he is a marquess on
the moon, on the shores of what he tells me is called the _Sea of Tranquility_,
and he believes it would be much easier for him to visit me if I had a hedge
maze. I would not wish to inconvenience a man of such learning and beauty.

*March 22, A.D. 1125*

Much to my delight, the gentleman from the Sea of Tranquility tells me that my
lyrics are being sung not just around my court, but in his, as well. It is
truly an honor to know that the courts of the Moon find something in my humble
scribblings.

*October 11, A.D. 1125*

[Another great voyage][19], but I will not go east again. I will go north this
time, following the footsteps of my father, and the advice of my friend from
the Sea of Tranquility. We have many goods to trade, but I carry on me the most
precious thing of all: herbs from my garden, the herbs that the gentleman likes
so much.

[19]: 01_dobromir_images/20160827122516_1.jpg

*December 7, A.D. 1125*

The high chief of the Curonians is a truly charming man. He listens avidly to
my tales, my poems, my accounts of Persia and the Moon. This trip is much
better than that trip to that ungrateful satrap. [Vaishvilkas may be a
pagan][20], but he has a soul that is noble and a mind that is keen. We have
promised our love and aid to each other, and will send letters to one another
with our merchants.

[20]: 01_dobromir_images/20160827122742_1.jpg

*August 4, A.D. 1126*

A braggart and swine from the east has decided he can take my lands, which I
rule by divine right, through simple force. As though this weren't provocation
enough, his very name is the name of my friend's sworn enemy: [Sol][21]. He
rides towards my northern border, on the river Danube, with a host. I ride to
meet him, with my army, God, and the Marquess from the Sea of Tranquility on my
side.

[21]: 01_dobromir_images/20160827122953_1.jpg

*May 21, A.D. 1128*

Victory! After almost two years of fighting this Sol, he is my captive and his
armies are disbanded.

As I sat in front of my tent in the field in Križevac, he was brought before
me, his eyes glowering and cast down to the ground, his lank black hair ragged
and bloody around his face.

At the urging of my friend the Marquess, I mocked him and asked him how much
the sun might offer for his ransom. He stayed sullen and silent. Well, it is
one more victory for those of us from the moon.

*November 6, A.D. 1129*

This court is a nest of vipers. I can trust precious few: the Marquess,
Vaishvilkas, and that's it. Well, my physician. But today, a woman arrived at
court who not only is worthy of my trust, but who understands just how vicious
life inside these walls is. Her name is [Mirjana][22], and I have given her my ear
and a stipend, and tasked her with rooting out treason and lies.

She is unwed, but charming enough that everyone wishes to talk with her, and
thus she turns that sin, gossip, into a virtue: loyalty to the crown.

[22]: 01_dobromir_images/20160827124407_1.jpg

*December 6, A.D. 1130*

Alas, my physician has died, some time ago, after serving me faithfully and
truly. I have had to resign myself to the search again, and have found an
interesting figure: a man named [Karlo][23]. Well, a eunuch. He is as far from
the mystical and ascetic Ratimir as any may be, and though he be a glutton, my
previous physician may yet have eaten more than he will.

I have met with the man, and he may be one more to introduce into my inner
circle. The chief of the Curonians is busy with his own affairs, and the
Marquess is currently at war with another lunar faction, and so I have been
left with very few to talk with these days.

Karlo knows almost as much about war as he does about God and healing, and that
has been a joy, too. I am strapped for military minds to match my own.

[23]: 01_dobromir_images/20160827124931_1.jpg

*July 6, A.D. 1132*

The Sicilian king declared war this February, hoping to force me to pay him
tribute. However, [I captured him in battle][24] (our first engagement, no
less), thanks to the exertions of Karlo on the field. Bohemond tried to retreat
when he saw his flank falling, but Karlo had encircled him already. So I had
him brought to my table, where I offered him food and drink (which he rudely
declined) and told him that this would not be our last meeting. I have had
claims to the very land where he sees fit to make his capital, and I have not
pressed them out of respect for our mutual understanding. But now, that is
shattered, and the Italian lands will be mine.

> _Historian's note: These claims were almost certainly fabricated._

[24]: 01_dobromir_images/20160827125340_1.jpg

*March 7, A.D. 1136*

My courtiers call me "[the cruel][25]" when they think I cannot hear. I have
ensured that some of them will not hear again.

The promise I made to the Sicilian king Bohemond now comes due. With the
support of the council, I have [declared war][26] for my lands on the Italian
peninsula. Mirjana is among those who oppose the action, and I cannot help but
think that she has such an overabundance of love for my person, care for my
well-being, that she would have me stay safe and isolated from the world. Poor
Mirjana, you cannot keep me safe from all threats, and some danger must be
borne for the sake of glory and justice. If I am to make good on this second
chance God has granted me, since allowing Ratimir to die in my place, I must go
to war.

[25]: 01_dobromir_images/20160827130459_1.jpg
[26]: 01_dobromir_images/20160827130518_1.jpg

*June 21, A.D. 1138*

Bohemond concedes my land back to me. [Justice is done.][27]

I have toured my new castles in Apulia, and while Normans live in filth, they
have some interesting thoughts when it comes to military architecture. I shall
have to incorporate these elements into my castles in Split.

[27]: 01_dobromir_images/20160827131135_1.jpg

*April 18, A.D. 1143*

Alas! Mirjana is dead. All those who would keep me safe seem to suffer greatly
for their troubles. I am told that she was assaulted by armed men, [brigands
hired by my cousin Boris][28]. If he wanted her dead, she must have been on to
some valuable secret. I must keep an eye on him, and not let him get the upper
hand.

The Marquess tells me that the custom of his people is to plant a tree under a
traitor such as Boris, and let it grow through his body, impaling him with its
growth. I do not think I can manage such a feat, but I think my own dungeons
have horrors enough.

[28]: 01_dobromir_images/20160827133100_1.jpg
